Changelog for 5.2.0 (#9334)
kokkos/kokkos: CHANGELOG.md

# CHANGELOG

## 5.2.0

[Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/5.1.1...5.2.0)

### Features:
* Rank<1> MDRangePolicy support [\#9028 ](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9028)
* Introduce generic `parallel_for` with `RangePolicy` taking a team handle in hierarchical parallelism - enables writing generic functions with a nested `parallel_for` that can be called from host or device [\#8367](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8367)
* create_mirror_view_and_copy one argument convenience overload [\#9185](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9185)
* Add new Random Number generator type SFC64 [\#9017](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9017)
* Support using `mdspan` style template arguments for `View` thus enabling explicit specification of `index_type` [\#9185](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8852)

### Backend and Architecture Enhancements:

#### CUDA:
* Support more than 48kB of scratch memory request for level 0 (shared memory) [\#9012](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9012)

#### HIP:

> * Improve performance of load/store atomic by leveraging HIP compiler built-ins instead of generating them via CAS [\#9040](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9040)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of load/store atomic by leveraging compiler built-ins instead of generating them via CAS [\#9040](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9040) [\#9219](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9219)
```

* Fix an ambiguous call compile error when calling the masked version of simd reduce with default arguments [\#9079](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9079)
* Add bounds check to prevent OOB access in tuner dimension indexing [\#9090](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9090)
* Atomics: fix warning with lock free fetch op on pointers [\#9086](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9086) [\#9132](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9132)
* Fix RangePolicy CUDA/HIP performance regression with static batch size 1 [introduced](github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8164) in Kokkos 5.0 [\#9123](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9123), [\#9124](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9124)
* Fix bug in compiler detection for RISC-V preventing use of clang++ [\#9155](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9155)
* Fix segfaults when doing unaligned simd stores on AVX512 [\#9184](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9184)
* Fix signed integer overflow UB in random generators’ range functions [\#9216](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9216)

> * Fixing memory error in `make_candidate_set` tuning function [\#7875](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7875)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixing memory error in `make_candidate_set` tuning function [\#7875](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7875)
* `is_assignable` now returns false when querying if one can assign to a const `View` (not `View` of const elements`) [\#9073](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9073)
```

### Backend and Architecture Enhancements:

#### CUDA:
* Support more than 48kB of scratch memory request for level 0 (shared memory) [\#9012](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9012)

#### HIP:
* Improve performance of load/store atomic by leveraging compiler built-ins instead of generating them via CAS [\#9040](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9040) [\#9219](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9219)
* Add AMD GFX1151 (Strix Halo / Radeon 8060S) architecture support [\#9179](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9179)
* Add AMD Radeon 860M / RDNA3.5 / gfx1152 architecture support [\#9242](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9242)
* Add AMD GFX1101 (Radeon RX 7800 XT, RX 7700 XT, RX 7700) architecture support [\#9230](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9230)
* Improve performance of `deep_copy(v, 0)` on MI300A [\#9125](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9125)

#### SYCL:
* Fix Windows build issues [\#9043](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9043)

#### OpenACC:

> * Fix OpenACC `parallel_scan` chunk boundary race [\#9078](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9078)

Reviewer 3: Hi @seyonglee 
Could this be relevant?

* Refactor OpenACC `parallel_scan` with potential performance gain [\#9103](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9103)

Reviewer 4: Since we haven't seen any performance improvements, I wouldn't add it.

Reviewer 5: The PR #9103 will have potential performance gain since it reduces the amount of memory accesses and computation, but no performance tests were conducted yet (and it is unlikely to have noticeable performance gain since the amount of memory and computation reduction is small).

Reviewer 3: Thank you for your comments, @masterleinad and @seyonglee. I will try to get performance numbers sometime. I personally was quite happy working on this PR.

So, we will not enter this into the Change Log.

Reviewer: This sounds to me like it should not be included ...

Reviewer 3: Yes, this is not going into the change log.

# CHANGELOG

## 5.2.0

[Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/5.1.1...5.2.0)

### Features:
* Rank<1> MDRangePolicy support [\#9028 ](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9028)

> * Introduce generic `parallel_for` with `RangePolicy` taking a team handle in hierarchical parallelism - enables writing generic functions with a nested `parallel_for` that can be called from host or device [\#8367](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8367)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Introduce self similar interface - enables writing generic functions with a nested `parallel_for` that can be called from host or device [\#8367](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8367)
```

> * Introduce generic `parallel_for` with `RangePolicy` taking a team handle in hierarchical parallelism - enables writing generic functions with a nested `parallel_for` that can be called from host or device [\#8367](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8367)

Author: ```suggestion
* Introduce a new self-similar interface for writing generic functions with a nested `parallel_for` that can be called from host or device [\#8367](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8367)
```

Just slightly modifying your suggestion

* create_mirror_view_and_copy one argument convenience overload [\#9185](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9185)

> * Add new Random Number generator type SFC64 [\#9017](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9017)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add random number generator SFC64 [\#9017](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9017)
```

> * Support using `mdspan` style template arguments for `View` thus enabling explicit specification of `index_type` [\#8852](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8852) [\#9303](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9303) [\#9276](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9276)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support explicit specification of `index_type` in `View` [\#8852](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8852) [\#9303](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9303) [\#9276](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9276)
```

### Backend and Architecture Enhancements:

#### CUDA:
* Support more than 48kB of scratch memory request for level 0 (shared memory) [\#9012](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9012)
* Enable C++23 support with NVCC (available since CUDA 13.3.0) [\#9264](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9264)

#### HIP:

> * Improve performance of load/store atomic by leveraging compiler built-ins instead of generating them via CAS [\#9040](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9040) [\#9219](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9219)

Reviewer: This can go in the general section, not limited to hip

Author: done

* Add AMD GFX1151 (Strix Halo / Radeon 8060S) architecture support [\#9179](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9179)
* Add AMD Radeon 860M / RDNA3.5 / gfx1152 architecture support [\#9242](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9242)
* Add AMD GFX1101 (Radeon RX 7800 XT, RX 7700 XT, RX 7700) architecture support [\#9230](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9230)
* Improve performance of `deep_copy(v, 0)` on MI300A [\#9125](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9125)

#### SYCL:

> * Fix Windows build issues [\#9043](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9043)

Reviewer 6: Was cherry-picked into 5.1.1 in #9109
https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/blob/13d0ac2a29c4e5767781b1ad00bd52c74021c0fd/CHANGELOG.md?plain=1#L18

Author: removed, thanks for pointing it out

#### OpenACC:
* Fix OpenACC `parallel_scan` chunk boundary race [\#9078](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9078)

#### NextSilicon:
* Add `NextSilicon` execution space and `NextSiliconSharedSpace` memory space [\#8998](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8998) [\#9100](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9100)

#### HPX:

> * Fix team parallel_reduce buffer indexing, clamp host thread count at startup, and unregister execution spaces on finalize [\#9138](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9138)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix team `parallel_reduce` [\#9138](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9138)
```

### General Enhancements
* Add `index_type` (signed) to execution space instance classes and harmonize with `size_type` (unsigned) across different backends [\#7441](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7441)

> * Add `noexcept` annotations to move constructors and assignment operators of execution spaces [\#8990](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8990)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add `noexcept` annotations to move constructors and assignment operators of `execution spaces` [\#8990](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8990)
```

Author: I think we don't need the backticks here since it isn't literal code

* Make View move constructor `noexcept` [\#8792](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8792)
* Add `std::uint32_t` support in Kokkos SIMD Neon backend [\#8942](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8942)
* Import math constants from the standard library [\#9016](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9016)
* Increase max level 1 team scratch size from 20MB to 80MB per team [\#9084](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9084)
* core(graph): rename interoperability graph access with `<backend>_` prefix [\#9159](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9159)

> * core(graph): node kind enum [\#9170](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9170)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* core(graph): add enum to identify node kind [\#9170](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9170)
```

* Add `create_mirror_view_and_copy(a_view)` overload [\#9185](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9185)
* Sepperated out (limited) iterator support from algorithms and moved to core [\#6684](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6684)
* Check extent preconditions on Views in std::algorithms [\#6811](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6811)
* Make the flag argument in simd constructors and load/store functions optional aligning with C++26 [\#9211](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9211) [\#9275](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9275)
* Use C++11 style attributes in definition of `KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_FUNCTION` and add MSVC support [\#9229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9229)
* Introduce `BadAlloc` exception thrown by out of memory allocation requests [\#9260](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9260)
* `MDRangePolicy`: skip grid-stride loop when not needed (CUDA/HIP/SYCL) [\#9142](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9142) [\#9250](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9250)

> * Introduce KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_[CLASS_]LAMBDA macros [\#9239](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9239)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Introduce `KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_[CLASS_]LAMBDA` macros [\#9239](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9239)
```

* Ensure the C++20 module `kokkos.core` can be used with latest MSVC and gcc-16. [\#9148](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9148), [\#9149](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9149).

> * Allow access to backend-native node in Kokkos::Graph [\#9147](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9147)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow access to backend-native node in `Kokkos::Graph` [\#9147](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9147)
```

> * Promote numeric traits from Experimental:: namespace into Kokkos:: [\#9082](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9082)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Promote numeric traits from `Experimental::` namespace into `Kokkos::` [\#9082](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9082)
```

### Build System Changes
* Build system prints output of compilation check [\#8986](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8986)
* nvcc_wrapper: Handle response files. [\#9175](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9175)

> * Remove Kokkos_CXX_STANDARD user option (was an error to use). [\#8983](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8983)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove `Kokkos_CXX_STANDARD` user option (was an error to use). [\#8983](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8983)
```

### Incompatibilities (i.e. breaking changes)

> * Forbid passing identical view arguments to `deep_copy()` [\#9033](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9033)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Abort with identical view arguments to `deep_copy()` instead of silently doing nothing [\#9033](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9033)
```

### Deprecations
* Deprecate `[static_]extent(r)` calls with `r >= rank()` to align with `mdspan` preconditions [\#9076](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9076) [\#9075](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9075) [\#9072](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9072) [\#9074](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9074)

> * Remove code guarded by KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4 since Kokkos 4.2 and before [\#8957](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8957)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove code guarded by `KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4` since Kokkos 4.2 and before [\#8957](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8957)
```

* Remove code guarded by KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4 since Kokkos 4.4 and before [\#8966](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8966)
* Remove code guarded by KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4 since Kokkos 4.6 and before [\#8980](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8980) [\#9009](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9009)
* (Partial) Remove code guarded by KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4 in Kokkos 4.7 [\#9002](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9002)

> * (Partial) Remove code guarded by KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4 in Kokkos 5.0 [\#9013](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9013)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove code guarded by `KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4` since Kokkos 4.4 and before [\#8966](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8966)
* Remove code guarded by `KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4` since Kokkos 4.6 and before [\#8980](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8980) [\#9009](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9009)
* (Partial) Remove code guarded by `KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4` in Kokkos 4.7 [\#9002](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9002)
* (Partial) Remove code guarded by `KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4` in Kokkos 5.0 [\#9013](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9013)
```

* Remove deprecated code path disabling enforcement of RangePolicy preconditions [\#9007](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9007)
* Remove miscellaneous deprecated code [\#9005](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9005)
* Remove untracked deprecated code 4 [\#9029](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9029)
* Remove all SIMD deprecated code [\#9008](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9008)

> * Remove (deprecated) CUDA_UVM macro and option [\#8968](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8968)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove (deprecated) `CUDA_UVM` macro and option [\#8968](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8968)
```

* Remove deprecated CUDA_LAMBDA and CUDA_LDG_INTRINSIC macros and options [\#8960](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8960)
* Remove (deprecated) DEBUG_DUALVIEW_MODIFY_CHECK macro and option [\#9010](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9010)
* Remove SpaceAccessibility::deepcopy [\#9018](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9018)

> * Deprecate Experimental HIP and SYCL symbols [\#9232](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9232)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove deprecated `CUDA_LAMBDA` and `CUDA_LDG_INTRINSIC` macros and options [\#8960](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8960)
* Remove (deprecated) `DEBUG_DUALVIEW_MODIFY_CHECK` macro and option [\#9010](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9010)
* Remove `SpaceAccessibility::deepcopy` [\#9018](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9018)
* Deprecate Experimental `HIP` and `SYCL` symbols [\#9232](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9232)
```
ok, I am not sure if we care about using code highlighting or not ... I always find it easier to read if it is marked, but I see no clear rule for that in this pr. I am fine either way though. Will stop marking it now

### Bug Fixes

> * Only use __atomic_max_fetch with floating point types from LLVM 22.1 on [\#8991](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8991)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Only use __atomic_max_fetch with floating point types with LLVM >22.1 [\#8991](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8991)
```

Author: ```suggestion
* Only use `__atomic_max_fetch` with floating point types with LLVM >22.1 [\#8991](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8991)
```

Just adding backticks to the `__atomic_max_fetch`

* Fix simd arithmetic operators calling host-only functions on device [\#9004](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9004)
* Fix compile failures on AppleClang 14 and Clang 14 and 15 when using simd [\#9065](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9065)

> * Fix error message at compile time when index type is specified twice as template argument to the execution policy [\#9085](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9085)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve error message when specifying index type twice as template argument to the execution policy [\#9085](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9085)
```

> * Fix an ambiguous call compile error when calling the masked version of simd reduce with default arguments [\#9079](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9079)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Make masked version of simd reduce with default arguments unambiguous [\#9079](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9079)
```

* Add bounds check to prevent OOB access in tuner dimension indexing [\#9090](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9090)

> * Atomics: fix warning with lock free fetch op on pointers [\#9086](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9086) [\#9132](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9132)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix warning with lock free fetch op on pointers [\#9086](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9086) [\#9132](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9132)
```

* Fix RangePolicy HIP performance regression with static batch size 1 [\#9124](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9124)

> * Fix bug in compiler detection for RISC-V preventing use of clang++ [\#9155](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9155)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix bug in compiler detection for RISC-V with clang [\#9155](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9155)
```

* Fix segfaults when doing unaligned simd stores on AVX512 [\#9184](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9184)
* Fix signed integer overflow UB in random generators’ range functions [\#9216](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9216)
* Fixing memory error in `make_candidate_set` tuning function [\#7875](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7875)

> * `is_assignable` now returns false when querying if one can assign to a const `View` (not `View` of const elements`) [\#9073](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9073)

Reviewer: Do we treat this as bugfix or as a breaking change?
I would argue fro the latter

Author: That's fair, it can technical break people. I will move it

* Fixed nullptr dereference possibility with GCC 12.5.0 [\#9262](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9262)
* Fix accumulator type in `parallel_scan` when using more exotic types (e.g., automatic differentiation frameworks) [\#9178](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9178)

> * simd-sve: replace memory load by zip-lane-set in gen-based simd constructors for improved performance [\#9192](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9192)

Reviewer: This does not sound like a bugfix to me

Author: moved to enhancement

* Fix thread-safety for `parallel_scan` [\#9300](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9300)
* Fix ambiguous overload in Kokkos::resize with ExecutionSpace [\#9128](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9128)

> * Fix subview construction between managed and unmanaged Views [\#8967](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8967)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix construction of an unmanaged subview from a view [\#8967](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8967)
```

* Check extent preconditions on Views in std::algorithms [\#6811](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6811)
* Make the flag argument in simd constructors and load/store functions optional aligning with C++26 [\#9211](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9211) [\#9275](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9275)
* Use C++11 style attributes in definition of `KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_FUNCTION` and add MSVC support [\#9229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9229)
* Introduce `BadAlloc` exception thrown by out of memory allocation requests [\#9260](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9260)
* `MDRangePolicy`: skip grid-stride loop when not needed (CUDA/HIP/SYCL) [\#9142](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9142) [\#9250](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9250)
* Introduce KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_[CLASS_]LAMBDA macros [\#9239](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9239)
* Ensure the C++20 module `kokkos.core` can be used with latest MSVC and gcc-16. [\#9148](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9148), [\#9149](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9149).
* Make HostMirror return types consistent and simplify HostSpace selection [\#8252](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8252)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Make HostMirror return types consistent and simplify HostSpace selection [\#8252](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8252)
* Allow access to backend-native node in Kokkos::Graph [\#9147](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9147) 
* Promote numeric traits from Experimental:: namespace into Kokkos:: [\#9082](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9082)

```

* (Partial) Remove code guarded by KOKKOS_ENABLE_DEPRECATED_CODE_4 in Kokkos 5.0 [\#9013](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9013)
* Remove deprecated code path disabling enforcement of RangePolicy preconditions [\#9007](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9007)
* Remove miscellaneous deprecated code [\#9005](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9005)
* Remove untracked deprecated code 4 [\#9029](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9029)
* Remove all SIMD deprecated code [\#9008](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9008)
* Remove (deprecated) CUDA_UVM macro and option [\#8968](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8968)
* Remove deprecated CUDA_LAMBDA and CUDA_LDG_INTRINSIC macros and options [\#8960](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8960)
* Remove (deprecated) DEBUG_DUALVIEW_MODIFY_CHECK macro and option [\#9010](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9010)
* Remove SpaceAccessibility::deepcopy [\#9018](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9018)
* Deprecate Experimental HIP and SYCL symbols [\#9232](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9232)

> * Deprecate `extents` for dimensions larger than the rank [\#9075](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9075)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
Covered in 9076 mentioned above.

### Bug Fixes

> * Fix `View::extent_int(r)` to behave as `View::extent(r)` with `r>=rank` [\#9072](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9072)

Reviewer 4: I'd just fold it into the entry for 9076.

* Fix signed integer overflow UB in random generators’ range functions [\#9216](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9216)
* Fixing memory error in `make_candidate_set` tuning function [\#7875](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7875)
* `is_assignable` now returns false when querying if one can assign to a const `View` (not `View` of const elements`) [\#9073](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9073)
* Fixed nullptr dereference possibility with GCC 12.5.0 [\#9262](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9262)
* Fix accumulator type in `parallel_scan` when using more exotic types (e.g., automatic differentiation frameworks) [\#9178](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9178)
* simd-sve: replace memory load by zip-lane-set in gen-based simd constructors for improved performance [\#9192](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9192)
* Fix thread-safety for `parallel_scan` [\#9300](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9300)
* Fix ambiguous overload in Kokkos::resize with ExecutionSpace [\#9128](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9128)
* Fix subview construction between managed and unmanaged Views [\#8967](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8967)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fix subview construction between managed and unmanaged Views [\#8967](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8967)
* Fix using Kokkos::UnorderedMap as a set [\#6584](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6584)

```

* Check extent preconditions on Views in std::algorithms [\#6811](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6811)
* Make the flag argument in simd constructors and load/store functions optional aligning with C++26 [\#9211](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9211) [\#9275](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9275)
* Use C++11 style attributes in definition of `KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_FUNCTION` and add MSVC support [\#9229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9229)
* Introduce `BadAlloc` exception thrown by out of memory allocation requests [\#9260](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9260)
* `MDRangePolicy`: skip grid-stride loop when not needed (CUDA/HIP/SYCL) [\#9142](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9142) [\#9250](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9250)
* Introduce KOKKOS_FORCEINLINE_[CLASS_]LAMBDA macros [\#9239](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9239)
* Ensure the C++20 module `kokkos.core` can be used with latest MSVC and gcc-16. [\#9148](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9148), [\#9149](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/9149).

> * Make HostMirror return types consistent and simplify HostSpace selection [\#8252](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/8252)

Reviewer 7: @janciesko does #8252 deserve a changelog entry? It's touching things in `Kokkos::Impl` and AFAICT there are no user facing changes

Author: I removed it
